---
layout: default
priority: 3
title: Introduction to Chatbots
short: Intro
---

Chatbots: the what, why and who
===============================

Having been immersed in the technology for years, I sometimes forget
that many people are much less familiar with the ideas and jargon that
are second nature to me. So after a few people asked me "What is a
chatbot again?" I decided I needed to write this article. I will
cover:

 - What is a chatbot?
 - Why should I want one?
 - What is this site and who is it for?
 - Glossary of commonly used terms

What is a chatbot?
==================

A chatbot is a type of _conversational interface_, that is, a way to
interact with computer software using natural language (like English)
instead of a programming language (like Javascript) or a graphical
user interface like a website or app. I'm excited about conversational
interfaces because I think this is the natural way to interact with
computers - we talk to other humans, so why not computers? (I've
probably been influenced somewhat in this regard by a healthy
consumption of Star Trek growing up).

Imagine the following conversation with a computer:

"Do I need an umbrella today?"

"The chance of rain in London today is 5%. You're probably safe
without your umbrella."

"What about Luton?"

"It looks like it's going to rain in Luton."

In this conversation, the responses are generated by computer software
that interprets the user's expressions, performs actions and
responds. You're probably familiar with conversational interfaces from
Apple's Siri, Amazon's Alexa and Google Home. These are all
speech-based assistants that provide a conversational interface to a
variety of functions.

A chatbot is a conversational interface designed to work with
messaging apps like Facebook Messenger, Slack or Kik. Instead of
messaging people with these apps, you "chat" with a "bot" (robot), the
piece of software that you interact with.

This site is about the technology behind chatbots. In fact, as much of
the technology is shared, we are interested in the technology behind
any conversational interface. The main difference between speech-based
assistants (like Amazon Alexa skills) is that the user's speech is
interpreted by a *speech to text* system. The software then interprets
the text, and generates a response which is returned to the user via a
*text to speech* system. The rest of the technology (which handles
text) is very similar to that used for chatbots.

Why should I want a chatbot?
============================

The promise of conversational interfaces is that the user is able to
achieve their goals quickly and more easily, by making use of the same
method of communication that they use to talk to people. This should
also make interacting with computers more intuitive and
accessible. Unfortunately, we are a way off fully realising this
goal.

There are additional benefits to chatbots. As the success of WeChat in
China has shown, users can grow to love bots that do not display
intelligence, but respond only to simple keyword matching. One reason
for this is the prevalence of mobile phones. Messaging is a very light
interaction, in the following senses:

 - Typing a message can be easier and faster than navigating a web
   site when using a mobile phone.
 - Sending a message uses very little bandwidth compared to loading a
   full web site. This makes a difference in environments where there
   is a poor internet connection, or data transfer is expensive.
 - Adding a bot to your messaging app does not take up extra space on
   your phone, compared to adding a purpose built app.

Chatbots for Marketing
======================

Chatbots can be powerful marketing tools, specifically for online
advertising. Sending a user who clicks on an advert to a chatbot
instead of a website can greatly increase engagement, which means a
higher return on investment. In particular, you can create Facebook
ads that send users straight to a conversation in Messenger. If the
user interacts in any way with the bot, the user's Messenger contact
will be available to the advertiser (unless the user explicitly blocks
the bot), allowing the advertiser to contact them at any later
point. Contrast this with sending a user to a website, where the user
has to enter their email address in order to gain their contact
details.

Who can build a chatbot?
========================

Thanks to the [tools described on this site](/) anyone can build a
chatbot! It will help if you have some of the following skills:

 - **User Experience Design** - you need to be able to think through how
   a user will interact with your bot and how you can make this an
   easy and fun experience, and test this on real users.
 - **Copywriting** - your bot is going to talk to people, and you
   need to be its voice.

If you want to build an advanced bot with complex behaviour, or if
you'd doing something that hasn't been done before, you might need
technical skills. In particular:

 - **Software development** - to engineer your solution
 - **Data science** - to run experiments comparing different
   variations of your solution, if you're lucky enough to have
   thousands of users
 - **Natural language processing** - you don't really need this
     since there are plenty of tools to do this for you, but it often
     helps to know the technology behind what you're using

Finally
=======

Chatbots have the potential to change the way we interact with
computers. They have yet to live up to that promise, but I hope that
by identifying the best tools, we will help that become a reality.
